---
title: HFC
summary: An introduction to using academia's Slides feature.
authors: []
tags: []
categories: []
date: "2019-02-05T00:00:00Z"
slides:
  # Choose a theme from https://github.com/hakimel/reveal.js#theming
  theme: black
  # Choose a code highlighting style (if highlighting enabled in `params.toml`)
  #   Light style: github. Dark style: dracula (default).
  highlight_style: dracula
---



<section data-background-image="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/62/Fraud.jpg" data-background-size="contain" data-background-position="right">

<div  style="width: 50%; height: 100%; float: left; color:#fff; background:#000; box-shadow:5px 0 0 #000, -5px 0 0 #000; padding: 5px 0;">
<h3>Verdad, mérito y fraude?</h3>               
<font size="3">
<p>Juan Camilo Espejo-Serna<br>Facultad de Filosofía y Ciencias Humanas<br> Universidad de la Sabana</p>
</font>
</div>
</section>


<section>

## Plan


1. Affair Sokal y la nutrición
2. La búsqueda de la verdad y la búsqueda del mérito
3. Fraude
</section>
<section data-background-image="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/62/Fraud.jpg" data-background-size="contain" data-background-position="right">


<h2 style="width: 50%; text-shadow: 2px 2px 4px #000000;">Affair Sokal</h2>

</section>
<section>

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sokal_affair
</section>
<section>

¿Qués nos dice esto sobre la integridad y el fraude en la academia?

</section>


<section>


Sokal dice más sobre la investigación transdisciplinar, interdisiplinar y multidisciplinar que sobre el fraude.
</section>

<section>

La búsqueda de la verdad es importante en la ciencia, ampliamente entendida, pero ¿es lo único o lo más importante?
</section>

<section>
Otro caso
</section>

<section>
Wansink was a nutritional scientist at
Cornell, who specialised in the psychology of eating. He had
authored ‘studies suggesting people who grocery shop hungry buy
more calories; that preordering lunch can help you choose healthier
food; and that serving people out of large bowls encourage them to
serve themselves larger portions’, and on the basis of his expertise
on these phenomena had been feted by the press and called to assist
Google and the US Army run programmes designed to encourage
healthy eating 1 .The problem, however, was that he had not in fact
produced evidence for these claims. 
</section>

<section>

an academic investigating Wansink’s misconduct found that to the best of his knowledge
(as of the 6th of April 2017) ‘there are currently 42 publications
from Wansink which are alleged to contain minor to very serious
issues, which have been cited over 3,700 times, are published in
over 25 different journals, and in eight books, spanning over 20 years of research’. 
</section>

<section data-background-image="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/62/Fraud.jpg" data-background-size="contain" data-background-position="right">


<h2 style="width: 50%; text-shadow: 2px 2px 4px #000000;">Búsqueda de la verdad y búsqueda del mérito</h2>

</section>

<section>
El crimen no paga; la ciencia tampoco.
</section>


<section>
La ciencia se hace por amor a la verdad</section>
<section>
Hay casos en donde sí paga: industrias que no están interesadas en la verdad pero sí en las ventas. Se apoya la investigación para que se lleguen a resultados específicos en contra de la verdad. 
</section>

<section>
Prominent examples have been cigarette companies seeking to undermine public
confidence in results showing that smoking caused cancer, or coal
and oil companies seeking to discredit research demonstrating the
reality and harms of human caused climate change.
</section>


<section>
Si la ciencia busca la verdad, este tipo de casos se vuelven misteriosos.
</section>

<section>
Sociólogos de la ciencia: en vez de pensar en buscadores de la verdad, mejor pensar en buscadores del mérito y crédito.</section>

<section>
Crédito y mérito es  cuestión de la prioridad y prominencia de 

1. La investigación
1. La revista en que se publica
1. La universidad y cargo en el que se está
1. De la persona y su personalidad 
</section>


<section>
La búsqueda del crédito y mérito parece explicar mejor el fraude.
</section>

<section data-background-image="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/62/Fraud.jpg" data-background-size="contain" data-background-position="right">


<h2 style="width: 50%; text-shadow: 2px 2px 4px #000000;">Fraude</h2>

</section>


<section>
We are now in a position to state and understand the standard
theory of scientific fraud. Scientists want and need credit for new
results. To ensure their results are new, i,e, novel enough to have a
plausible claim to establishing priority, scientists have to do their
work sufficiently quickly that nobody else beats them to the punch
(often referred to as being ‘scooped’ on a claim)</section>


<section>

1. Libertad de la investigación permite elegir metodologías.
1. La fabricación de evidencia favorece la novedad y velocidad. 
1. Énfasis en la novedad desicentiva revisión del trabajo de otros.

</section>
<section>

"Credit-seeking caused fraud – removing credit-seeking is thus removing the cause of fraud."</section>


<section>
<h1>PERO</h1></section>


<section>
La búsqueda del crédito y mérito también promueve actitudes positivas en la ciencia.
</section>


<section>
1. Solidaridad científica:

Búsqueda del reconocimiento implica la difusión del conocimiento.

</section>

<section>
Ejemplo: Darwin avanzó la publicación y difusión del Origen de las Especies por temor a que otros llegaran antes. </section>


<section>
2. Pluralismo científico:

Búsqueda del reconocimiento implica multiplicidad de resultados y métodos
</section>


<section>
La búsqueda del reconocimiento implica la exploración de nuevos métodos y resultados
</section>
<section>

Ejemplo: Vacunas 
</section>

<section>
For science to function properly we need scientists to spread out in logical space, to explore various possible theories that might account for the data, and various possible methods for testing claims and generating and analysing data.
</section>

<section>

But this variety does not come easy! ... If scientists all wanted to get at the truth, and were sharing their information about how effective various methods are, shouldn’t they all use whatever is communally agreed to be the most effective truth-seeking method? Likewise and for similar reasons, should they not analyse data in light of what is communally agreed to be the most plausible theory? It is credit seeking that can help us avoid this rush to methodological conformism.
</section>
<section>
¿Entones?
</section>

<section>

It’s easy to judge Wansink (Fraude de nutrición) as a bad apple who cared too much for his career and not enough about the truth. But if the standard theory of fraud is even roughly correct, he was in some sense simply responding to the culture and institutions we have set up in academia.

</section>

<section>
If you find people systematically breaking the rules the option is always available to you to shake your fists at them for their wicked ways and hope that sufficient moral condemnation will stem the tide of bad behaviour. But another option is to carefully study the social system giving rise to this behaviour, and with sleeves rolled up and an experimental attitude, get to work creating a better world.
</section>

<section id="prox" data-transition="fade-in" data-background="#009933" data-background-transition="zoom">



## Para la próxima clase

### Repaso de TODO

</section> 

